Hey folks, Intel is a
sponsor this week and I
welcome them because they're bringing
some high performance developer tools
for all of us. Check
out Intel's parallel studio X,
E I've talked about parallelism
before on the show and
the importance of using the
complete instruction set, unlocking the
power of the process or
that your code is running
on. Now, you all might
be writing C or C
plus plus Python or even
Fortran, but is your code
building in such a way
and written in such a
way that it uses the
latest techniques for vectorization multithreading
multi-node parallelization or memory optimization?
Intel parallel studio XC as
a lot of new stuff
for 2018 across all these
languages. Get a free download
at  dot com slash
parallels studio Z, or certainly
go and Google or Google
with being for Intel parallel
studio XC and get started.
Boosting your apps performance with
smart parallel code with a
lot less effort. Check them
out. bitly.com/parallel studio X E
. This is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Gary Nissenbaum from GDN
law.com GDN law.com. You may
remember Gary from show six
Oh one, where we talked
about terms of service for
developers. How are you sharing
your fast becoming our favorite
lawyer on the show? I
am thrilled to be back.
I had a terrific time
being interviewed by you last
time, and I'm really looking
forward to this one because
I think it's a very
topical and important subject. Yeah.
Well, we're going to talk
about GDPR, the general data
protection regulations. I was literally
trying to work on this
a little bit late on
my own podcast site. I
am a small business, you
know, a micro business. Even
I put my cookie consent
pop up there and looked
at all the different places
where I store data. And
I, I think I'm okay,
but you know, I'm not
a big company. I don't
have the time where the
lawyers, frankly, to read all
the paperwork, it seemed kind
of weird that this is
even affecting me over here
in America. Not only that,
but when you say you
don't have the lawyers to
do this, my question would
be, are you talking about
American lawyers or are you
referring to European lawyers? And
if you're not talking, if
you're not referring to European
lawyers, then how do you
know you're complying with the
European law? And that's part
of what I want to
discuss today, which is a
terrific, very important principle, which
is maintaining privacy of data.
I believe in it, 100%,
I'm a big civil libertarian,
but the implementation is lacking
The forethought of how to
do it without unintended consequences
seems to have been lacking.
Oh, there's a lot to
be. There's a lot to
dig into here, but let's
start at the beginning. You
know, what is it, what
is the general data protection
regulations and how does it
affect what America does? Well,
the re the general, the
data protection regulations that we're
talking about is the culmination
of a series of proposals
and directives and regulations that
have gone on since around
2002. And they all STEM
from the basic thrust that
Europeans want to protect the
collection of data, the storage
of data, and the use
of data. And they want
to do that for the
people that the European union
protects. And that is citizens
of those countries. The issue
that we're going to discuss
today is that European users
don't just access websites in
those countries. So to the
extent that they are accessing
an American website, and to
the extent that the American
website is not compliant, there
is a strong argument that
the American website is a,
is a in violation with
all the attendant implications that
that brings in terms of
fines and other sorts of
things. Doesn't that imply that
we can't win. I mean,
there's 200 and something plus
countries in the world. And
if any European decides to
swing by, you know, a
website in Djibouti, now they're
going to be subject to
laws of Europe. Let's, I'll
double down on that. It
implies that any country that
has users of the internet
can create a more stringent
law than even the Europeans.
And then on the basis
of that become the preeminent
regulatory body of the world,
because it's a race to
who can be the most
restrictive, because the most restrictive
is whatever one needs to
comply with. So if Tanzania
decides that it is going
to be the most restrictive
country in terms of the
laws, the privacy regulations, and
frankly, other regulations that, that,
that relate to internet use
of their citizens, theoretically, all
websites around the world have
to be concerned about that
because there are users they
could, that could be accessing
their website from Tanzania. They
wouldn't even know it. Right.
Let me see if I
can parse that though. So
you're saying that the idea
that Europe, as an entity
could create a thing as
broad reaching. And as you
know, let's just say broad
reaching as a GDPR that,
that opens up a precedent
that anyone else could go
and do the same thing
that then it would affect
all of us. That's right.
And when you borders to
something that doesn't have borders
and the reason that's exactly
right. And the reason that
that is so critical is
that the entire Canon of
American law going all the
way back to the founding
of the country is that
our courts are the prime,
the prime movers on statements
of law, that if you
have a lawsuit and you
litigate it in a trial
level court, and you don't
like the result, you can
take your appeal. But at
the, at the, in the
final analysis, when you've exhausted
your appeals, that is the
law. That is what has
to be complied with. But
what we're seeing here is
a sea change in how
laws are enforced and the
primacy of law, because you
could theoretically have a situation
where a digital company is
in a lawsuit. The lawsuit
goes all the way up
to the United States Supreme court,
the United States Supreme court finds
in favor of one party
or the other, but that's
not the final answer that,
that even though the Supreme
court has said that the
activity is allowed, that privacy
of American citizens is not
being infringed upon based upon
first amendment protections and other
sorts of, of statutory protections.
You could still have a
whole regime of laws from
outside the borders of the
United States that would still apply
to the same activity that
the Supreme court has just
said. You could, you could
engage in, Okay. So not
to put too fine a
point on it, but then
what legal basis does the
EU have to levy fines
or sanctions against a us
company that doesn't have any
jurisdictional presence or nexus in
the EU? The company is
entering into the jurisdiction of
that European country by virtue
of providing services to its
citizens. So if I let's
say for example, and this
is a real, a real
example, that this is a
municipality in America that is
letting citizens pay their water
bill completely, utterly, legitimately, U
S only. Now a us
person is in Europe, on
vacation. They can't pay their
water bill. It's more along
the lines of the example
I would give similar to
where you're going is someone
in the EU owns American
property. And so they need
to pay their water bill,
but they're a citizen of
that country. They're an investor.
They have a vacation home
here. The fact is that
they are accessing this website
that normally you would think
Americans would be accessing, but
this is a very legitimate
why someone from Europe would
be accessing that website. I
would argue that you could
say that the GDPR does
apply to it. You just
turned that on its head
very nicely. That was a
very, that was a judo
flip. It's my job. That
was an excellent doodle flip
because you're like, I'm like,
wow, you're absolutely right. Well
then it's like, well, private,
we all agree. Privacy is
good, but you know, this
seems very heavy handed way
to do things. And I'm
afraid, I don't know what
I'm storing now, you know,
on a blog comment or
something like that. Something what
I think of as being
harmless. Well, I mean, let's,
you know, let's talk about
this. You're, you're, you're forcing
companies that don't have the
capital to really go into
this kind of depth about
European law to comply with
the European law. So essentially
people are flying blind. Let
me, let me bring this
down to the practical in
terms of my clients and
in terms of people that
I've seen in other situations
that are not my clients,
very few businesses are actually
having the opt in, pop
up on that homepage. And
there's a reason it's not
just that it's difficult to
implement because frankly, you know,
in WordPress, it's not, not
that difficult to implement. It's
more that when you have
that opt in, nobody goes
to your website that you
will have a tremendous drop
in visitors. People don't want
to deal with you. They
don't, they want to go
to the next website where
there's no opt in because
they don't know what they're
opting into. So the interesting
part, another interesting part of
this is that the very
thing that the European union
is trying to say, which
is we don't realize what
we are sharing and how
our information is being shared
and where, how it's being
stored. And, and the fact
that it's not being stored
with complete security, therefore there
would need to be an
opt in. That's the very
reason that people are not
staying on that website and
moving on because they don't
want to deal with the
issue. So in essence, it's
our limited attention span. The
fact that we're not digging
down as consumers, and I'm
probably as guilty of this
as anybody, when I go
on a website and I
just am viewing things casually,
why am I opting into
anything? It always gives me
a sense of somehow agreeing
to something that I don't
understand. And I don't know
why, why they're asking me
and I have a lot
of questions. So the consumer
who's using the internet is
not really on the same
wavelengths as the regulators in
the EU. Yeah. Additionally, I'm
noticing more and more. There
was the move towards an
active opt in, which is
simply the act of pushing,
okay. Versus hitting the back
button. Now I'm hearing interpretations
where I have arrived at
a website. I've received no
cookies, but if I click
any link, I have implicitly
opted in by simply moving
forward. Right. That's something that
I don't think I could
explain to nontechnical parent Cambridge
Analytica. Look what happened in
2016, the idea that you
would go on Facebook and
you're the friends of your
friends, their information is now
available because you completed a
survey that did not disclose
that it was actually not
so much a survey as
a means into your private
data. So the point I'm
making is we have two
irreconcilable principles and they're both
good principles. The privacy of
this data is really, really
important. People have to know
that no one's opening their
mail, essentially, you know, but,
but on the other hand,
the sophistication and the frankly,
the attention span of the
casual user is just not
correlated. It's not in proportion
to the complex nature of
what you're giving up when
you're on the internet. So
there is this disconnect between
the something, an activity that
you're doing that seems to
be innocuous and innocent and
that you're in control of.
And then whether you actually
are in control of it,
and then how you reconcile
those two things without becoming
overly regulatory and overly complex.
Right? And if you think
about just simply the act
of being on the internet
is enough to give your
IP address away, which is
enough to get very likely
to hear municipality, if not
your neighborhood, without even using
any JavaScript at all. So
simply visiting a site is
giving information, logging an IP
address, I assume is a
problem. If I am a,
a site owner, if I'm
logging IP addresses, I'm indirectly
logging where you are. Is
that allowed if I don't
keep track of who you
are? Well, yeah, that's that,
that's the whole point is
that all those sorts of
activities are impacted by these
regulations. And then let me
just take it to another
level because the States of
the United States are passing their
own privacy laws and regulations
that are in parallel to
the GDPR. Meaning California just
passed a digital privacy law.
And it was fascinating to
look at how that all
went down. The state legislature
in California really was in
opposition to this at first,
but then what came out
was that there was going
to be a referendum on
it. And what the legislators
realized was that if the
referendum passed, there'd be no
way to hone this and
correct any unintended consequences and
amend it and sort of
make it do what they
wanted it to do. So
they felt they were boxed
in politically and they passed
it. And it's not going
to go into effect for
a couple of years until
2020. I understand that. But
the larger point is that
they're going to need to
look at this law, which,
which has been passed in
relation to European law, which
is regulating some of the
same things, but not all
the same things. So there
are differences. And then look
at that in relation to
other States that are similarly
passing privacy regulations related to
internet use. So now you
have a patchwork of not
just countries, but States in
the United States, all sorts of
doing the same thing. And
it becomes so chaotic that
an eCommerce website much less
a, a developer who is
working under a master services
agreement and all the rest
of that doesn't know what
to do. They don't know
where to turn. They don't
know how to comply. Yeah,
I'm, I'm hearing questions online
that are difficult for anyone
to parse. An example was
we talked about opting in,
but certainly a big part
of the GDPR is the
right to be forgotten, right?
The explicit opt out. So
let's say for example, I'm
encrypting all the data that's
being kept of my users.
And then you've decided to
opt out, you've invoked your
right to be forgotten if
I delete the, the, the
encryption key, but your data
exists on disc in some
format, but it cannot be
accessed. Have I deleted you
Or not? That's a good
sort of technical architecture, The
questions that how could anyone
know that it would really
just be your as a
lawyers interpretation of the law?
Wouldn't it. Let me, let
me give you my take
on that. In my experience
with that, you know, I,
I, our firm, we do
a huge amount of e-commerce
work and work with digital
clients. And one of the
things that comes up a
great deal is newspapers in
the United States, major publications that
are refusing to take down
articles that are incorrect about
my clients. So I get
people contacting me, asking me
to as a last resort,
cause they've tried for years
to get this stuff down.
They can't, they can't get
a job. They go on
job interviews. Somebody goes on,
Google puts their name in
and finds out that they
did these horrible things. They
assaulted somebody, they were involved
in summer, but none of
it's true. It was just
erroneous reporting in the heat
of a confrontation of some
type. They didn't do anything.
And the newspaper literally refuses
to take it down, even
if it's incorrect. So you
have a situation where the
newspaper is asserting its first
amendment, right? First amendment to
the United States constitution. The Supreme
court will normally back that
up. And then that newspaper
now has to decide not
so much whether they want
to take it down because
this person has a right
to be forgotten because it's
an erroneous article. That's not
the issue. The issue is
they want to keep it
up, but now they're being
forced to take it down
by a law of another
country. So it becomes highly
complicated and, and it's just
not the way these decisions
should be made. They should
be made on the merits
of somebody deserves to be
forgotten. You should have a
dialogue with the newspaper and
the newspaper should be reasonable.
And there should be some
kind of compromise on some
level, even, even just a
second article or something or
correction, but that's not what's
going on. What's going on
is what you're talking about,
which is at a digital
level, they may delete the
article. Well, deleting the article
comes very close to modifying
the historical record. You know,
it, it gets very close
to exactly what, what you
don't want to have in
a, in a democracy that,
that, that prizes, civil liberties.
So how do you balance
all of that? And that's
really the question And definitely
an unintended consequence and that
echo is going to echo
through for, for many years.
Hey friends, this is Scott.
You know, listening to podcasts
is a great way to
keep up to date on
technology. Since we're always learning
as software people. And you
can also find a job
by listening to a podcast.
If you check out our
new sponsor, hired.com, that's H
I R E d.com/hansel minutes
on hire.com. Software engineers can
get interview requests from companies
that want to hire you.
Each offer will have the
salary and the equity up
front. You can view those
interview requests and, you know,
except project change the offer
before even talking to a
company. It's a great way
to find out what's out
there and maybe make a
move they're working with over
6,000 companies from startups to
large companies from 14 major
tech hubs throughout North America
and Europe. What's great about
this is it's totally free
for software engineers. And if
you get a job to
hire.com, that'll ordinarily give you
a $300. Thank you bonus.
But if you use our
special link, they'll double that
bonus. So you'll actually get
paid $600 when you accept
that job. Now, if you're
not looking for a job,
but you know, someone who
is refer them to hire.com/hansel
minutes, and they'll give you
a lead bonus, a $1,337
bonus when they accept a
job. So check them out
at  dot com slash
Hanselman. Let's talk about the
size of companies like in
my day job, I work
at Microsoft and it's big
enough that it has a
whole GDPR department, you know,
and it's not a temporary
thing anymore. Like it's full
time making sure that people
don't do the wrong thing,
which is good from a
privacy perspective. And in my
side job, I have a
podcast and a blog, and
there are a million or
millions of little small developers
that have no idea. If
they're going to get nailed.
Am I going to lose
my house? If someone comes
and says, I want to
be forgotten off of your
blog and I don't have
a way to solve that.
Well, you're absolutely right. The
first day that the GDPR
was enforced, there were complaints
filed against a bunch of
these very large companies. Facebook
is an obvious example, $664,000
was the equivalent of that
fine and dollars based upon
what they, what happened with
Cambridge Analytica. You know, you're
talking about Google being found
fine for abusing its mobile
software monopoly five point $1 billion.
They got a two point
$7 billion fine for a prior
year for abusing a search
monopoly. So my point is,
all these big companies are
getting fined, enormous amounts of
money, but they're not missing
a beat. The fines are
not destroying them. The fines
are not putting them out
of business. Whereas someone like
you're describing someone such as
yourself operating something on your
own, you know, if you
even get a modest, fine,
that can shut you down.
So there was a, there
was a disproportionality of impact.
The fact that, that these
fines are large is not
the issue. The issue is
the proportionality of the fine
to the ability to pay.
And one of the wonderful
things about the, the internet
about, about the web is
that anybody can just throw
up a website with very
little capital and just go,
it's not the same kind
of infrastructure that has to
be paid for when you
have a brick and mortar
business, the way it used
to be. But, but if
by going, you're going right
into a sand trap and
you're going to be bankrupted
by some kind of crazy
fine that you never anticipated.
That's a problem. And it's
an unintended consequence of all
this. And I also want
to, if I may just
sort of get to another
level on this issue, because
when you think about it,
the other countries are getting
involved in this regulation of
privacy on the internet, various
States, such as California and
others are getting involved, but
someone's missing that. Someone's missing
from the discussion. Well, the
United States government, the federal government.
And I will tell you
that my view is that
to some extent, one extent
or another, and I guess
historians looking back on this
period of history will, will
give us the answer. We
don't know a completely right
now to one extent. I
know that the reason for
all this chaos and the
reason for all these questions
is that our federal government
meaning our Congress has not
taken up the issue of
digital privacy in a robust
way. Congress de-funded its own
office of technology years and
years ago, that would have
been the place to get
the kind of advice they
need to deal with this.
They, they had Mark Zuckerberg
testifying, but the questions they
were, they were really showing
a lack of understanding of
what Facebook does. So my
point is that in past,
in the past, these issues
that, that were broad, that
related to the entire United States
that were States were disagreeing
with one another. The idea
was that each state was
sort of a laboratory of
democracy. That's what it was
called. And then together, they
would all go up to
the Supreme court. There would
be a decision that it
would, they would go to
their, to their congressmen and
congresswomen, and they would ask
them to pass a law.
And there would be a
national consensus that would be
created through preemption of state
law, federal law, primacy over
state law. That's not happening.
That's not even on the
radar right now. So far
as I know. And because
of that, we're all left
to our own devices there
to, to, to sort of
sum it up. My opinion
is there should have been
much more robust negotiations between
the American government and the
European union, so that the
implementation of this was not
going to be this disruptive
and raise this many questions.
Number two, there should, the
federal government should have been
helping small businesses and medium
sized businesses to understand their
obligations and make it reasonable
and assist. I'm not talking
about handouts. I'm talking about
information, places to call right
now. We're all on our
own. And number three, I
do believe States should be
able to put in place
privacy regulations and laws. Of
course, that that is something
the state should be able
to do, but there should
also be an overarching way
that the federal government is
organizing this. So that business
has predictability and simplicity because
if you don't have that,
the very unknown becomes a
drag on commerce. And just
to give a little bit
of context for folks who
might not have it in
1972, the office of technology
assessment was created. It was
defunded in 1995. And interestingly
enough, in June of 2018,
it was at attempted to
put in an amendment to
reinstate that long defunct office.
And that was voted down
a long party. And that
office of technology, you are
totally right about that. And
that office of technology assessment
was meant to deal with
the future. It was, it
was put in place decades
ago with the understanding that
they knew this is where
things were headed, but they
didn't know exactly how it
was going to go. But
the one thing they did
know was that Congress would
need to have objective advice
from its own body, that
they would, they would need
their own people to look
at this, not lobbyists, not
people with an agenda, but
their own people sort of
like the office of management
and budget and things like
that, where the government advises
itself and they defunded it.
So I've got two questions
here. The first one is
what, what can I, what
can a small or medium
sized business do about this?
And should they do what
major us news sites are
doing? Thousands of us news
sites have simply punted. I
know that we think of
news sites as being large
businesses, but they're surprisingly small
businesses. And a number of
them have just said, forget
it. We don't really want
to serve the European community.
And if you come in,
we'll just, we won't even
do anything with GDPR. We'll
simply ignore the problem and
block you entirely. Right? And,
and that, that is a
major problem. And I would
argue that that those news
sites are really doing a
disservice to their readers. Let's
start with what shouldn't be
happening and then talk about
what should the businesses from,
from what I can tell
from, from people I see
from clients, I see from
people who are just in
this area, I will tell
you that there is a
patchwork of solutions. And the
patchwork generally is inadequate. You
have people with consent banners
and opt out, as well
as opt ins and not
making a distinction between them.
They have something called a
nuke button to let you
reject everything, you know, basically.
And then, and then all
sorts of banners and other
things that you do. So
essentially it's such a panoply
of, of, of cause I'll
call it solutions. That's, that's
really solving nothing. So that's
so, so number one is
you shouldn't, you know, there's
an old saying you don't
want to react. What you
want to do is respond.
So the first thing is
don't just do something to
do something. Number two, I
think that there should be
collaboration with the developers, with
the outside vendors, with, with
people who are putting up
the content, you know, the
idea of just assessing liability
and figuring that there'll be
a lawsuit someday, if there's
a problem and let the
judge or jury figure it
out is not really a
solution. I think that there
has to be a collaborative
approach within the company with
its own vendors, with its
own developers, where everyone's talking
to one another, that may
sound pretty straight forward, but
I will tell you that
the CEO of the company
is getting advice from the
accounting firm, from the internal
marketing people and from the
developer. And it's all disjointed.
There should be a collaboration
among all of them. They
should all be talking together
and coming up with something
that works for the company
and complies with the law,
which then leads me to
the final point, which is,
I think that you need
a lawyer that is sort
of in this world and
understands it because the decision
on what to do is
going to be fairly nuanced.
And you know, that that
is a problem. And certainly
it is another layer of
responsibility and other way of
expense. And I'm not minimizing
that. I understand the problem,
but if you, if you
aren't bringing all the players
together and having them collaborate
to come up with some
kind of unifying solution, which
I'll, I'll be, it will
be an inadequate one because
we don't know all the
answers yet. You're making a
situation worse by just reacting
and just doing something to
do it. So it sounds
like those of us that
have small businesses, we can,
you know, do the popups,
do the privacy policy, make
sure that people have the
right to withdraw the water,
the right, to have their
data removed. All of the
things that you know, the
basics, but that really should
be looked at by someone
who has experienced in the
space. I think it has
to be. And at the
end of the day, we
have to have a commercial
maturity about this. And what
I mean by that is
it's not about setting people
up to blame later on.
If it goes wrong, that's
a simplistic and frankly not
constructive way of doing business.
In my opinion, you know,
the clients I work with
generally, don't do that. You
know, we, we tell our
clients that, that we know
this area. We know what
we think you should be
doing. We're aware of the
laws, but at a certain
level, there is always going
to be a leap of
faith as to how a
regulator or how law enforcement
in this country or any
other country would see something.
Especially if the complaint comes
not, not this month, but
comes, you know, two years
from now. And there just
has to be an understanding
that ultimately the client needs
to make the decision, but
it has to be based
upon facts. They have to
understand the situation, which means
that, you know, business, people
need to immerse themselves in
an understanding of, of the
law and the regulations they're
dealing with. And they can't
just abdicate that to their
professionals. One of the, one
of the things we try
to do is, is bring
our clients in and not,
not talk down to them,
not just say, look, we're
the lawyers. We know the
law, just do it our
way. And if you don't
want to do it our
way, well, good luck. That's
not how we do it.
We explain all these things.
And to some extent, we
give them a level of
a, of instruction that you
wouldn't even see in a
law school in terms of
the specifics of the law
and the regulations so that
they, but the important thing
is they need the tools
to make the decisions because
ultimately they're the ones that
are going to be dealing
with the consequences to their
business. And so the, the
real answer here is that
if, if you, if anyone
assumes that there is a
simple way of handling this,
they're probably wrong. It is
complicated and you just have
to live with that because
that's the world we're in.
Well, I appreciate you taking
the time to chat with
us today. Thank you. This
was absolutely wonderful. And I'm
glad we, we spoke about
all these issues and if
anybody wants to contact me,
email's probably best gdn@gdnlaw.com. Gary David
Nissenbaum, gdn@gdnlaw.com. And you know,
I just like, I like
it last time I was
on your, your listeners gave
me terrific feedback. And I
just like to hear what
people think. So I'm interested.
We appreciate that they are
some of the best listeners
out there. And I appreciate
them a lot. This has
been another episode of Hanselminutes
and we'll see you again
next week.